# Project Title
Evaluating the effectiveness of protected areas and community-managed lands in capturing multiple dimensions of frugivorous biodiversity in the Tropical Andes

# Project Summary
The Tropical Andes is known for its remarkable biodiversity; however, this region faces significant anthropogenic pressures such as habitat loss and climate change, making it a conservation priority. Conservation efforts often concentrate on protecting areas with high taxonomic diversity (TD), overlooking the essential roles played by species that contribute to ecosystem functioning– functional diversity (FD). To ensure comprehensive conservation priorities, a broader perspective considering various dimensions of diversity is necessary. Further, there needs to be a better understanding of how community-managed lands contribute to the protection of biodiversity as they are essential for reaching spatial conservation targets. Here, We utilized the Frugivoria trait database to evaluate the functional diversity of frugivorous birds and mammals, which perform the vital role of seed dispersal, an essential ecosystem service necessary to maintain forest structure and ecosystem health. Across the Tropical Andes region, We quantified the spatial alignment and mismatch between taxonomic and functional diversity for areas with the highest diversity values in the region. Our findings revealed many spatial misalignments between the highest levels of FD and TD, emphasizing the limitations of relying solely on TD for conservation and the potential biodiversity trade-offs of doing so. Nevertheless, some alignment between taxonomic and functional diversity emerged for mammals and birds, identifying potential areas for multidimensional biodiversity conservation. Further, we found that some stricter protected areas (PAs) encapsulate different diversity dimensions better than less-strict areas and this differed among taxa.  Similarly, we examined the distribution of Functionally Unique, Specialized, and Endangered (FUSE) species and their protection status across strict and less strict PAs. Some stricter protected zones had better coverage of FUSE species distributions, though many areas of high FUSE species richness remain unprotected. we also found that community-managed lands had higher levels of FD than other protected areas within the same protected area category. This has strong implications for the utility of other effective conservation measures (OECMs) such as Indigenous Lands and community-managed areas in protecting areas of high functional diversity. Our results highlight the need for a more holistic conservation approach that considers multiple dimensions of diversity in the context of varying degrees of protection and PA management. As global conservation goals target the protection of 30% of the Earth's land by 2030, our study underscores the importance of considering multiple dimensions of diversity and emphasizes the potential of OECMs in ensuring effective and sustainable conservation strategies within the Tropical Andes.


## Collaborators
- Beth E. Gerstner, Ph.D: Staff scientist, Yale University
- Phoebe L. Zarnetske, Ph.D.: PI, [MSU Spatial & Community Ecology Lab (SpaCE Lab)](http://www.communityecologylab.com)

## Publications
Gerstner, B.E., Zarnetske, P.L., (2024) Evaluating the effectiveness of protected areas and community-managed lands in capturing multiple dimensions of frugivorous biodiversity in the Tropical Andes. Biological Conservation.


## Code & Workflow
This repository contains code and the accompanying workflow for calculating functional diversity of mammals and birds exhibiting frugivory, assessing spatial alignments and mismatches, and evaluating levels of protection for the Tropical Andes. 

See ./code/readme.md for more details.
